== Web Services Introduction

=== What is a web service?

_A Web service is a software system designed to support interoperable
machine-to-machine interaction over a network. It has an interface
described in a machine-processable format (specifically WSDL). Other
systems interact with the Web service in a manner prescribed by its
description using SOAP messages, typically conveyed using HTTP with an
XML serialization in conjunction with other Web-related standards._

From _W3C Web Services Architecture_
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/NOTE-ws-arch-20040211[[1]]

Technical details will be later explained in the documentation. What
comes out is that web services provide a standard means of
interoperating between different software applications. Each of these
applications may run on a variety of platforms and/or frameworks
providing a set of functionalities. The main concern is about
interoperability between services.

* A service provider publishes a service contract that exposes the
public functions (operations) it is able to perform and thus service
consumers can use.
* Both service providers and service consumers features concrete
softwares that send and receive messages according to the informations
contained in the service contract they agreed before the communication.
* Basic Web services specifications define the standard way of
publishing a service contract and communicating.
* Web services stacks (like _JBossWS_ ) conform to these specifications
providing software layers to developers who want to either implement a
service provider or service consumer. This way they almost only need to
develop their own business logic in their preferred way, without dealing
with the low-level details of message exchanges and so on.

==== Who needs web services?

Enterprise systems communication may benefit from a wise adoption of WS
technologies. Exposing well designed contracts allows developers to
extract an abstract view of their service capabilities. Considering the
standardized way contracts are written, this definitely helps
communication with third-party systems and eventually support
business-to-business integration. No more agreement required on vendor
specific implementation details, home-brew communication protocol or
custom per-customer settings. Everything is clear and standardized in
the contract the provider and consumer agree on. Of course this also
reduces the dependencies between implementations allowing other
consumers to easily use the provided service without major changes.

Enterprise system may benefit from web service technologies also for
internal heterogeneous subsystems communication. As a matter of fact
their interoperability boosts service reuse and composition. No more
need to rewrite whole functionalities only because they were developed
by another enterprise department using another software language.

==== What web services are not...

Needless to say that web services are not the solution for every
software system communication.

Nowadays they are meant to be used for loosely-coupled coarse-grained
communication, for message (document) exchange. Moreover during the last
years a lot of specifications (
http://community.jboss.org/docs/DOC-13554#Future_of_Web_Services[WS-*] )
were discussed and finally approved to standardize ws-related advanced
aspects including reliable messaging, message-level security,
cross-service transactions, etc. Finally web service specifications also
include notion of registries to collect service contract references, to
easily discover service implementations, etc.

This all means that the web services technology platform suits complex
enterprise communication and is not simply the latest way of doing
remote procedure calls.

=== From concepts to technology

==== Service contracts

Contracts carry technical constraints and requirements of the exposed
service as well as information about data to be exchange to interact
with the service. They comprise technical descriptions and optional
non-technical documents. The latter might include human readable
description of the service and the business process it is part of as
well as service level agreement / quality of provided service
information.

===== Technical description

Service description is mainly provided using the standard
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl[Web Service Description Language (WSDL)] .
Practically speaking this means one or more XML files containing
information including the service location ( _endpoint address_ ), the
service functionalities ( _operations_ ), the input/output messages
involved in the communication and the business data structure. The
latter is basically one or more http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-0/[XML
Schema definition] . Moreover recent specifications (like
http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2004/09/policy/[WS-Policy] ) allow for
more advanced service capabilities to be stated in the contract through
WSDL extensions.

Web service stacks like JBossWS usually have tools to both generate and
consume technical contracts. This helps ensuring also from a practical
point of view that owners of service producer ( _server_ ) and consumer
( _client_ ) only need contracts to establish the communication.

===== Contract delivery process

One of the main concerns about service contracts is the way they're
obtained.

====== Bottom-Up approach

As previously said, tools allow developers to automatically generate
WSDL contract files given their service implementation. Advantages and
disadvantage of this delivery process include:

* Developers do not have to deal with contracts by hand thus deep
knowledge of WSDL and XML is not required.
* Less effort and time required for services to be developed and go live
to production environment.
* Contracts usually need frequent maintenance, refactoring and
versioning.

====== Down approach

Developers may write contracts first instead. This usually implies an
initial collaboration of architects and business analysts to define a
conceptual service design together.

* Services with contracts obtained this way may easily cooperate in a
service oriented architecture
* More effort and time required for web service project start-up
* Deep knowledge of WSDL and related technology required
* Contracts tend to have longer lifespans and usually require less
maintenance.

==== Message exchange

As stated by the
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/NOTE-ws-arch-20040211/#whatis[W3C definition]
, the communication between web services is standardized by the
http://www.w3.org/TR/soap/[SOAP] specification. This means XML messages
flow from the provider and consumer endpoints.

Messages' content is described in the wsdl contract. The WSDL file also
states the transport protocol to be used for the transmission; the most
common one is of course HTTP, however JMS, SMTP and other ones are
allowed.

==== Advanced Web Services technologies

The above mentioned specifications are quite common nowadays in the IT
industry and many enterprise have been using them since years.

However a real added value to the web service platform comes from a lot
of recent additional specifications. These cover features that are
really relevant to deliver mission critical enterprise services. For
example some of the most important agreements major vendors came to are
those on security (WS-Security) and reliable messaging (WS-Reliable
Messaging).
